what is clold???????????

cloud is just really a platform that you can have on-demand availability and delivery of virtual IT resources that you need for your personal use or your business use.

cloud Types??????

Private cloud : which is for organizations operating on a private network.

Public cloud : This is owned by a provider like Amazon or Google or even Microsoft. And they provide a cloud computing infrastructure for individuals like ourselves or businesses.

Hybrid cloud : this is just a combination of both private and public cloud offering.

Why do we use cloud???????

. speed the market
. high availability of resources
. unlimited storage
. very easy to use
. less money


Private cloud providers...... RedHat, Dell, VMWare....
Public cloud providers....... AWS, Azure, GCP


Cloud Service Models::::
PaaS
----->

Platform as a service

PaaS is a service that offers a complete development and deployment environment in the cloud.

SaaS
----->

Softwate as a service

SaaS is a way of deliverong applications or software over the internet to the end user as a service.
ex: ZOOM


IaaS
----->

Infrastructure as a service

A form of cloud computing that provides virtualized computing services over the internet.
ex: aws, gcp, azure


FaaS
----->

Function as a service

FaaS ia a cloud computing service that allows you to execute code in response to events.
FaaS is a serverless



What is server??????????
provide access to computing resources over the internet. 
server is a computer or device that provides programmable service to another computer or its user.

types of server???
. web server ( Nginx, Apache)
. file server (Windows file server, network attached storage)
. database server (MySQL, PostgreSQL)
. email server
. DNS server
. Application server

What is serverless???
Serverless is a cloud computing model that allows developers to build and run applications without managing servers. 

serverless ia a cloud computing execution model in which the cloud provider allocates machine resorces on demand.

serverless computing allows you to focus on writing code to perform specific tasks, while the cloud service provider handles the infrastructure, resource allocation, and event-driven execution of your functions.
